---
label: "13"
title: Scrutinizing “Sarapon”
subtitle: Investigating a Mummy Portrait of a Young Man in the Michael C, Carlos Museum, Emory University (Inv. 2004.48.1)
type: essay
weight: 213
contributor:
- first_name: Renée
  last_name: Stein
  bio: "Renée Stein is the chief conservator at the Michael C. Carlos Museum at Emory University, where she oversees the treatment, preventive care, and technical analysis of the museum's diverse collections. She is also a lecturer in the art history department and teaches courses on conservation and technical study. Stein received a MS in objects conservation from the Winterthur/University of Delaware Program in Art Conservation. She is a professional associate of the American Institute for Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works and has been recognized with that organization's Sheldon and Caroline Keck Award for outstanding mentoring."
- first_name: Lorelei H.
  last_name: Corcoran
  bio: "Lorelei H. Corcoran is a professor of art history and the director of the Institute of Egyptian Art and Archaeology at the University of Memphis. She received her BA in classical studies from Tufts University and her PhD in Near Eastern languages and civilizations (Egyptology) from the University of Chicago. A specialist in Egyptian art and the study of the iconography of portrait mummies, Corcoran is the author of <em>Portrait Mummies from Roman Egypt (I--IVth Centuries AD) with a Catalogue of Portrait Mummies in Egyptian Collections</em> (University of Chicago, 1995) and the coauthor, with Marie Svoboda, of *Herakleides: A Portrait Mummy from Roman Egypt* (Getty Publications, 2011)."
short-title: Scrutinizing “Sarapon”
---

In 2004 the Carlos Museum of Emory University acquired a mummy portrait that depicts a young, beardless man wearing a white {{< q-def "tunic" >}} ([fig. 13.1](#fig_13_1)). He has dark curly hair, thick eyebrows, and full lips. Within a red, tabula ansata--shaped label at the subject's right, an inscription in Greek provides his name, patronymic, and age at death. He is identified as "Sarap[i]on,"[^1] son of Haresas, 25 (or 29) years.[^2] Little more than 3 percent of the approximately one thousand mummy portraits worldwide include texts with the deceased's name,[^3] making this example both rare and significant.

The portrait's modern history began in the early twentieth century, when Philadelphia art collectors Vera and Samuel Stockton White III purchased the work from the Dikran Kelekian galleries. The Whites' substantial art collection was donated to the Philadelphia Museum of Art in 1967; however, the mummy portrait was not included in that gift and instead was sold by Parke-Bernet Galleries, New York, presumably to its last private owner, businessman Jonas Senter.[^4]

{{< q-figure id="fig_13_1" >}}

Upon acquisition by the Carlos Museum, the painting was treated to stabilize loose fragments, remove an historic but inappropriate frame, and minimize its fragmentary appearance by selectively inserting toned fills. The report from that treatment confirmed earlier observations: the portrait was assembled from more than one painting.[^5] The APPEAR Project motivated this present reconsideration, which also benefits from improved technology.

The Carlos painting consists of more than fifty fragments of varying lengths and widths. The woods range in color, and their painted surfaces differ in thickness, {{< q-def "ground" >}}, and brushwork. While the fragments can be differentiated by close visual inspection, this study also employed materials analysis and multispectral imaging to associate the fragments into groups.

Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry analysis of representative paint samples identified traces of aged {{< q-def "beeswax">}} on some fragments and {{< q-def "animal glue">}} on others; an egg coating might have been selectively applied. Analysis and examination are complicated, however, by the presence of modern animal glue used to secure the fragments to the plywood backing. Overpainting created most of the proper left eye and cheek, reshaped the proper right shoulder, and produced the highlights on the tunic's folds. Additional media samples along with wood identifications may further differentiate fragment groups.

A complex puzzle emerges from combining close visual examination and media analyses with multispectral imaging and elemental mapping. Individual fragments and brushwork are highlighted by differences in radio-opacity in X-ray images. Fragments can be further distinguished and associated by their appearances under ultraviolet ([fig. 13.2](#fig_13_2)) and {{< q-def "FCIR" "false-color infrared" >}} imaging, revealing modern interventions. The distribution of elements present in various paints also suggests relationships among fragments. Elemental mapping by scanning X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy showed lead to be present in some whites as well as some reds, while iron is present in retouching on the face ([fig. 13.3](#fig_13_3)). Calcium is concentrated in the group of fragments above the ear, which have a visible, thick, white ground. Zinc is associated with modern reworking; the absence of zinc in the fragments comprising the inscription is noteworthy. Scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy analysis of a sample from the white letters revealed a highly crystalline compound of oxygen, aluminum, sulfur, and sodium, with trace inclusions of lead. {{< q-def "Raman spectroscopy" >}} confirmed the presence of a sulfate compound, indicating that the letters are painted with (sodium-?) aluminum sulfate.

{{< q-figure-group grid="2" id="fig_13_2, fig_13_3" class="pdf-two-column" >}}

The inscription fragments are smoothly painted, probably in glue {{< q-def "tempera" >}}, on dark wood with no visible ground layer. Those fragments and others adjacent to them appear similar by visual examination, multispectral imaging, and elemental mapping. Some fragments associated with this group depict carefully delineated black curls, indicating that the named deceased had dark hair with wiry curls. It is unlikely, however, that the face presents Sarap[i]on's likeness. Examination and analysis reveal that the face fragments were instead painted in wax {{< q-def "encaustic" >}}, and although probably ancient, they have been reworked. Thus, the fragments that now comprise the Carlos portrait were likely taken from three or more ancient portraits, perhaps from among those found at {{< q-def "Antinoöpolis">}}, {{< q-def "er-Rubayat" >}}, and/or {{< q-def "Hawara" >}}.

In 1966, while it was still in the White collection, the portrait was described by Klaus Parlasca as "a heavily overpainted {{< q-def "pastiche" >}},"[^6] and in 1993 Dominic Montserrat pronounced that it was of "dubious authenticity."[^7] Despite these reservations, however, Parlasca and Frenz did [not]{.underline} list the Carlos portrait in the forgeries section of their most recent volume of the *Repertorio*---perhaps because they acknowledged that it "incorporates original fragments."[^8]

It could be argued that as a modern assemblage, retouched and intended to present a unified whole, the Carlos portrait constitutes a fake. Yet, there is historical accuracy to both the depiction and the object. The text and the image record and evoke the life of a young man who died in Roman Egypt and was memorialized according to contemporary religious practices and regional stylistic preferences. The Carlos portrait is, therefore, a modern construct that is representative of both the named deceased and of the genre of ancient painting to which mummy portraits belong. In its re-presentation of ancient fragments, this object underscores the subtle distinctions that affect the assignment of "authenticity."

## Acknowledgments

We thank Melinda Hartwig for permission to publish. We acknowledge the contributions of Jessica Betz Abel, Madeline Beck, Ann Brancati, Miriam Cady, Caroline Cartwright, Claire Fitzgerald, Eric Formo, Stacey Gannon-Wright, Joy Mazurek, Brian P. Muhs, Tanya Olson, Michaela Paulson, Tina Salguero, Morgan Webb, Terry Wilfong, and The Andrew W. Mellon Foundation.

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}
## Notes
{{< /q-class >}}

[^1]: The name is written in the text without an iota, but *Sarapion* was the more common spelling in antiquity; see as corrected in {{< q-cite "Montserrat 1996" >}}, 184n27.

[^2]: {{< q-cite "Parlasca 1966" >}}, 82, initially proposed the text be read 25 years [of age]; then later, {{< q-cite "Parlasca and Frenz 2003" >}}, 65, hesitated between 25 and 29 because the final letter---whether epsilon, 5, or theta, 9---is unclear. {{< q-cite "Montserrat 1996" >}}, 184n27, read the age as lambda epsilon, 35. It is only in an archival photo of Sarap[i]on that the kappa (2) is clear, whereas the final letter is still not clearly legible. Regardless, the young Sarapion died, therefore, in his mid- to late twenties.

[^3]: {{< q-cite "Montserrat 1996" >}}, 184n27.

[^4]: Michael C. Carlos Museum records for Inv. 2004.048.001.

[^5]: {{< q-cite "Parlasca 1966" >}}, 81 and 259.

[^6]: {{< q-cite "Parlasca 1966" >}}, 81 and 259.

[^7]: {{< q-cite "Montserrat 1996" >}}, 184n27.

[^8]: {{< q-cite "Parlasca and Frenz 2003" >}}, 65 and 120.
