---
label: "18"
title: Binding Media and Coatings
subtitle: Mummy Portraits in the National Museum of Denmark and the Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek
type: essay
weight: 218
contributor:
- first_name: Lin Rosa
  last_name: Spaabæk
  bio: "Lin Rosa Spaabæk is a private conservator in Denmark, where she has restored and studied the collection of mummy portraits at the Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek. Spaabæk obtained her bachelor's degree in paintings conservation from the Royal Academy of Fine Arts, School of Conservation, Copenhagen; there she also completed her master's thesis on the study of mummy portraits. Spaabæk has been a consultant on funerary portraits at the Egyptian Museum in Cairo."
- first_name: Joy
  last_name: Mazurek
  bio: "Joy Mazurek is an assistant scientist at the Getty Conservation Institute, where she specializes in the identification of organic materials via gas chromatography/mass spectrometry. She obtained an MS in biology, with emphasis in microbiology, from California State University, Northridge, and a BS degree in biology from University of California, Davis."
short-title: Binding Media
copyright: "© 2020 Lin Rosa Spaabæk and J. Paul Getty Trust. Originally published in *Mummy Portraits of Roman Egypt: Emerging Research from the APPEAR Project* © 2020 J. Paul Getty Trust, www.getty.edu/publications/mummyportraits (licensed under CC BY 4.0)."
---

## Introduction

The authors analyzed via {{< q-def "GC/MS" "gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS)" >}} eleven Romano-Egyptian mummy portraits---ten {{< q-def "encaustic" >}} and one {{< q-def "tempera" >}}---from the National Museum of Denmark and the Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek to identify their {{< q-def "binding media">}}. GC/MS can distinguish between modern and ancient {{< q-def "beeswax">}} and can characterize the presence of oils, {{< q-def "plant resin" "plant resins" >}}, and proteins.[^1]

{{< q-def "XRF/pXRF" "X-ray fluorescence (XRF)" >}} analysis of the painted surfaces was used to identify the presence of lead {{< q-def "pigment" "pigments" >}} and their effect on the beeswax composition. Lighter-colored areas with high concentrations of lead pigments were compared with darker areas (results not shown) to complement the GC/MS findings.

## Binding Media

Two samples from the tempera portrait (AS 8940) were identified as {{< q-def "animal glue">}}, based on the presence of amino acids; samples from the ten encaustic portraits were classified as beeswax, based on a discernable pattern of hydrocarbons, fatty acids, and wax esters (see [Mazurek](/part-two/17/), this volume). [Figure 18.1](#table_18_1) provides a summary of the paint samples tested for each encaustic portrait. Five encaustic portraits contained, in addition to beeswax, unknown proteins, and two encaustic portraits contained animal glue: in a flesh-area sample (AEIN 681) and in a gray background (AS 3891). More research is needed to determine the sources of the proteins and the animal glue, as they could be from the ancient preparation layer or from contamination during (undetected) conservation treatments.[^2]
{{< q-figure id="table_18_1" class="table pdf-two-column" >}}

### Beeswax and Oils

Portrait AEIN 682 ([fig. 18.2a](#fig_18_2_a)) was analyzed via GC/MS for beeswax and oils. The upper chromatogram in [figure 18.2b](fig_18_2_b_1) shows results typical for ancient beeswax, confirming significant amounts of palmitic acid compared with wax esters. The lower chromatogram attests to the detection of azelaic acid, a dicarboxylic fatty acid used to identify oxidized oils. Other dicarboxylic fatty acid markers were found that may indicate Brassicaceae---that is, mustard, rapeseed, or radish---oil. Dicarboxylic fatty acids were identified in paint samples from portraits thought to have been discovered at {{< q-def "Hawara" >}} and {{< q-def "er-Rubayat" >}} and that date from AD 25 to 200, indicating that oxidized oil is present regardless of {{< q-def "provenance" >}}.[^3]

{{< q-figure-group grid="2" id="fig_18_2_a, fig_18_2_b" class="pdf-two-column">}}

The oxidized oil may attest to an intentionally modified encaustic, contamination, or a past restoration campaign. The relatively high concentrations of palmitic acid are likely due to the hydrolysis of wax esters and the subsequent formation of a fatty acid metal soap (i.e., lead palmitate). This soap was identified in the lighter-colored samples, which possess a greater amount of lead.

### Egg Coating

Visual examination shows that the two encaustic portraits, AEIN 681 ([fig. 18.3](#fig_18_3)) and AEIN 684, have unpigmented, deteriorated surfaces. Both works entered the Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek from the Theodore Graf Collection in 1892, and they likely originate from er-Rubayat. Amino acid analysis by GC/MS revealed that both coatings matched egg protein ([fig. 18.4](#fig_18_4)); however, they differ in their visual appearance and response to {{< q-def "UVF/UVL" "ultraviolet-induced visible fluorescence (UVF)" >}}, in their thickness, and in the method of application. The coating on AEIN 681 exhibits a bluish-yellow fluorescence, is very thin and glasslike, and has cracked into tiny "islands" with sharp edges. Although now only in scattered areas, the coating likely covered the entire portrait at one time. In contrast, AEIN 684's coating shows a brighter bluish yellow fluorescence under UVF illumination, is thicker and more translucent, and has a yellow tone, presumably due to aging/deterioration. Numerous tiny, lightly curled fibers are observed embedded in the coating.
{{< q-figure id="fig_18_3" >}}

Due to the locations of surface deposits and incrustations, these egg coatings are presumed to be original. Remains of resin from mummification, superficial layers of sand or dirt (burial material), and a lack of this coating within the more recent surface cracks support this hypothesis. Under UV light the egg coating on AEIN 684 (see [fig. 18.5](#fig_18_5_a)) reveals a distinct fluorescent border at the bottom of the portrait and a faint one at its top. The coating is not present where the mummy wrappings would have covered the {{< q-def "panel" >}}; therefore, we suggest that the coating was applied after attaching the portrait to the mummy, perhaps as a votive act. Further research is necessary to identify other portraits with similar coatings and to compare them with later egg coatings and varnishes applied to icons, medieval paintings, and sculptures.[^4]
{{< q-figure-group grid="2" id="fig_18_5_a, fig_18_5_b" >}}

## Acknowledgments

We thank the National Museum of Denmark (NM) and the Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek for their kind permission to examine and take samples from their mummy portraits. We also thank the staff at both museums; Michelle Taube (NM) and David Buti, Centre for Art Technological Studies, for the XRF examination; and the Carlsberg Foundation and the Getty Conservation Institute for their generous support.

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}
## Notes
{{< /q-class >}}

[^1]: {{< q-cite "Stacey et al. 2018" >}}.

[^2]: {{< q-cite "Cartwright, Spaabæk, and Svoboda 2011" >}}.

[^3]: AEIN 1425, 1426, and 1473 were excavated at Hawara; the remaining portraits belonged to the Graf Collection and are presumed to be from er-Rubayat.

[^4]: {{< q-cite "Woudhuysen-Keller and Woudhuysen-Keller 1994" >}}.
