---
label: "7"
title: Evaluating Multiband Reflectance Image Subtraction for the Characterization of Indigo in Romano-Egyptian Funerary Portraits
type: essay
weight: 107
contributor:
- first_name: Lauren
  last_name: Bradley
  bio: "Lauren Bradley is the associate conservator of paintings at the Brooklyn Museum, where she oversees the care and preservation of paintings dating from ancient Egypt through the present day. She earned an MS from the Winterthur/University of Delaware Program in Art Conservation and has held positions at the Kimbell Art Museum and the J. Paul Getty Museum in addition to completing training internships at the Barnes Foundation, the Walters Art Museum, and the Mauritshuis."
- first_name: Jessica
  last_name: Ford
  bio: "Jessica Ford is the assistant paintings conservator at the Brooklyn Museum. She received an MS from the Winterthur/University of Delaware Program in Art Conservation, and she has held positions at the Smithsonian American Art Museum, the Dallas Museum of Art, and the Doris Duke Foundation for Islamic Art, Honolulu."
- first_name: Dawn
  last_name: Kriss
  bio: "Dawn Kriss received her MA in conservation from the UCLA/Getty Master's Program on the Conservation of Archaeological and Ethnographic Materials. She has held positions at the American Museum of Natural History, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and the Brooklyn Museum. Kriss is now in private practice, specializing in multiband imaging."
- first_name: Victoria
  last_name: Schussler
  bio: "Victoria Schussler is a project objects conservator at the Brooklyn Museum. She received a BA in biology from Yale University and an MS from the Winterthur/University of Delaware Program in Art Conservation. Schussler has held positions at the Yale University Art Gallery, the Central Park Conservancy, the Museum of Modern Art, and the Corning Museum of Glass."
- first_name: Federica
  last_name: Pozzi
  bio: "Federica Pozzi is an associate research scientist at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. She leads the Network Initiative for Conservation Science (NICS), a pilot program designed to offer access to the Met's state-of-the-art scientific research facilities to partner institutions in New York City. Pozzi earned her PhD in chemical sciences from the University of Milan, Italy, and has held positions at the City College of the City University of New York, Art Institute of Chicago, and Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum."
- first_name: Elena
  last_name: Basso
  bio: "Elena Basso is a research associate in the department of scientific research at the Metropolitan Museum of Art and a scientist for the Network Initiative for Conservation Science (NICS). She received her PhD in earth sciences from the University of Pavia, Italy, in 2004. She has held positions at the University of Pavia and served as a scientific consultant at the Institute for the Study of the Ancient World, New York University."
- first_name: Lisa
  last_name: Bruno
  bio: "Lisa Bruno is Carol Lee Shen Chief Conservator at the Brooklyn Museum. She earned her MS in art conservation, with a specialty in objects conservation, from the Winterthur/University of Delaware Program in Art Conservation. She worked at the Art Institute of Chicago before joining the Brooklyn Museum as an assistant conservator."
short-title: Evaluating Multiband Reflectance
---

The Brooklyn Museum (BKM) began acquiring Egyptian antiquities in 1902 and now boasts one of the largest holdings of Egyptian materials in the United States. This renowned collection contains six Romano-Egyptian funerary portraits on {{< q-def "panel" >}}: Portrait of Demetrios (11.600, AD 95--100), Woman with Earrings (1996.146.9, AD 100--105), Mummy Portrait of a Man (ca. AD 120--130), Noblewoman (ca. AD 150), Boy with a Floral Garland in His Hair (ca. AD 200--230), and Portrait of a Young Person (ca. AD 200--230). Two of these portraits are characterized as {{< q-def "tempera" >}} paintings with aqueous {{< q-def "binding media">}} and four as {{< q-def "encaustic" >}} paintings with wax binding media. Aside from the Noblewoman portrait ([fig. 7.1](#fig_7_1)), which has been extensively restored, the portraits survive in remarkably good condition. All six portraits were documented and analyzed through visual examination, {{< q-def "RTI" "reflectance transformation imaging (RTI)" >}}, {{< q-def "x-radiography" "X-radiography" >}}, {{< q-def "IRR" "infrared reflectography (IRR)" >}}, {{< q-def "XRF/pXRF" "X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (XRF)" >}}, {{< q-def "FORS" "fiber optics reflectance spectroscopy (FORS)" >}}, {{< q-def "Raman spectroscopy" >}}, and {{< q-def "MSI/MBI" "multiband imaging (MBI)" >}}.
{{< q-figure id="fig_7_1" class="is-pulled-right">}}

This paper focuses on {{< q-def "MBR" "multiband reflectance image subtraction (MBR)" >}} for the characterization of {{< q-def "indigo" >}}. As few references to this technique exist in the literature, BKM conservators not only evaluated the information gained from its application to the study of Romano-Egyptian funerary portraits but also investigated the technique itself, refining variables in image capture and processing to optimize results. Protocols were developed for equipment setup and image capture using reflectance standards, color standards, and material samples as internal references. Spectral curves collected using FORS elucidated why materials other than indigo may be visualized in processed subtraction images. Selected data obtained from MBI, FORS, and Raman spectroscopy are discussed in this paper, along with relevant XRF results.

Indigo was detected exclusively in mixtures with a red {{< q-def "lake" >}} {{< q-def "pigment" >}} on three of the encaustic portraits; indigo, both in mixtures and alone, was found more widely on the two tempera portraits. Indigo was not found on the sixth portrait, also encaustic.

The use of indigo or woad on Egyptian textiles has been dated dates back to as early as the sixteenth century BC.[^1] Woad (*Isatis tinctoria*) was more commonly used as a dye; indigo (*Indigofera tinctoria*), likely imported from India starting in the Ptolemaic era,[^2] was more commonly employed as a pigment.[^3] The term *indigo* is used throughout this paper to encompass indigotin-based colorants irrespective of plant source.

Pioneered by Webb and colleagues,[^4] the MBR technique described in this essay combines one near infrared image and one visible light image in digital post-processing. This noninvasive and nondestructive technique can visualize and localize materials, including indigo, producing a surface map.

To evaluate our modifications to and application of the imaging technique, analyses were carried out using a visible-near infrared fiber optics reflectance spectrometer and a handheld Raman spectrometer. In addition, samples were taken for analysis using a benchtop Raman instrument.

Paint-out boards created using historically consistent materials were imaged and analyzed with FORS, serving as simplified analogues of the portraits and providing references for known materials in mixtures with indigo.

##  Multiband Imaging (MBI)

MBI image suites---including visible, {{< q-def "UVF/UVL" "ultraviolet-induced visible fluorescence (UVF)" >}}, {{< q-def "UVR/RUV" "ultraviolet reflectance (UVR)" >}}, IRR, and {{< q-def "VIL" "visible-induced infrared luminescence (VIL)" >}} images---of each portrait and paint-out board were captured using a modified Nikon D610 DSLR camera with the UV/IR filters removed and a Jenoptik 60 millimeter UV-VIS-IR Apo Macro lens (see [fig. 7.2](#table_7_2) for lighting and filter specifications). {{< q-def "FCUV" "False-color ultraviolet reflectance (FCUV)" >}} and {{< q-def "FCIR" "false-color infrared reflectance (FCIR)" >}} images were generated by combining reflectance captures via channel substitution in Adobe Photoshop®.[^5] A Spectralon 99-percent reflectance standard from Labsphere,[^6] an X-Rite ColorChecker Passport, and an unbound indigo pigment sample[^7] were included in all captures ([fig. 7.1](#fig_7_1)). An unbound {{< q-def "Egyptian blue" >}} pigment sample was included in all VIL captures. MBI suites of the paint-out boards included dry samples of the binding media and pigments used on each board ([fig. 7.3](#fig_7_3)).
{{< q-figure id="table_7_2" >}}
{{< q-figure id="fig_7_3" >}}


##  Multiband Reflectance Image Subtraction (MBR)

MBR to localize indigo was performed by illuminating the field with Solux MR-16 halogen bulbs, 4700 Kelvin output, and taking two captures: one with a Midopt BP660 bandpass filter and one with a BP735 bandpass filter. Captures were converted to grayscale in Adobe Photoshop's Camera Raw utility by setting the saturation to -100, and saved as TIFFs.[^8] The desaturated TIFF images were then combined using the "Difference" Blend Mode in Photoshop to generate a subtraction image. Processing could alternatively be carried out using free and open-source software such as ImageJ and GIMP.

The "Difference" function takes the absolute value of the difference between two source images, pixel by pixel, to generate a new image. Corresponding source-image pixels with similar RGB values yield small numerical differences, while the combination of pixels with dissimilar RGB values creates large numerical differences. Differences of zero in each color channel result in a black pixel; while differences of increasing magnitude generate pixels approaching white as the values approach 255 in each channel. Materials with little change in reflectance across the spectral regions encompassed by the BP660 and BP735 filters result in small numerical differences and appear dark in the MBR image.

Characteristic reflectance spectra for indigo display strong absorbance around 660 nanometers and strong reflectance just under 800 nanometers. The pairing of narrow bandpass filters centered at 660 nanometers and 735 nanometers exploits the pronounced difference in indigo's reflectance in the visible and near infrared ([fig. 7.4](#fig_7_4)).[^9] Indigo in various forms, including Maya blue, yields large numerical differences and appears bright in MBR images generated from captures made using these filters. Imaging performed at BKM indicates that other blue materials including lapis lazuli and ultramarine; cobalt-containing blues, such as cobalt blue, smalt, and cerulean blue; and, to a lesser extent, Egyptian blue, can also produce brightness in these images due to their reflectance behaviors.[^10] MBR as a characterization technique is strengthened in combination with knowledge of an object's historical context and through corroboration by other imaging and analytical methods.
{{< q-figure id="fig_7_4" >}}

To achieve reliable and consistent MBR results, the measured exposure of the BP660 capture should be as close as possible to that of the BP735 capture without exceeding it.[^11] Because the two bandpass filters pass different amounts of light, the BP660 capture typically requires a longer exposure time than that of the BP735 capture to result in a pair of images in which the BP660 capture is as close as possible to but still darker than the BP735 capture. Ensuring that the exposure gap between the two captures is as narrow as possible maximizes the specificity of the MBR technique, highlighting those materials with the largest differences in reflectance in this spectral region. The exposure of each capture was assessed using the RGB values of the Spectralon reflectance standard and the Neutral 8 gray square on the X-Rite ColorChecker Passport. The ColorChecker gray square was used because the American Institute for Conservation imaging guidelines already utilize this standard, recommending an RGB value of 200 in both visible and infrared photography.[^12]

As with many imaging techniques, shifts in camera position or lighting between captures and uneven lighting can confound processing and undermine the usefulness of reflectance and color standards. Unlike with many other imaging techniques, suboptimal captures not only lower the quality of MBR results but can actually create misleading or erroneous images. Capture sets where one or both relative exposure values were higher in the BP660 shot were empirically found to produce erroneous results, in which some materials appeared bright or dark in ways not clearly related to each other or to known reflectance behaviors. Capture sets with the desired arrangement of exposures but larger exposure gaps produced MBR images with wider grayscale ranges, reducing the specificity of the technique. Adjusting exposures post-capture utilizes nonlinear functions and can also yield unrepresentative results.

##  Raman

Raman analysis of samples taken from the portraits was performed microdestructively using a benchtop Bruker Senterra Raman spectrometer equipped with a 50x microscope objective and a charge-coupled device (CCD) detector. A continuous wave diode laser emitting at 785 nanometers was used as the excitation source, and two holographic gratings (1800 and 1200 rulings per mm) provided a spectral resolution of 3 to 5 reciprocal centimeters. The output laser power, number of scans, and integration time were adjusted based on the Raman response of the sample being analyzed.

In situ Raman analysis was conducted nondestructively using a handheld Bruker Bravo Raman spectrometer equipped with a CCD detector, featuring double laser excitation (785 nm and 852 nm) and providing a resolution of 10 to 12 reciprocal centimeters. The output laser power was approximately 50 milliwatts for both lasers, while the number of scans and integration time were adjusted based on the Raman response of the area being analyzed. Spectra were interpreted by comparison with the Metropolitan Museum of Art's library databases and with published literature.

##  Fiber Optics Reflectance Spectroscopy (FORS)

FORS readings were taken using an Ocean Optics FLAME-S-UV-VIS-ES spectrometer with an instrument range of 350 to 1000 nanometers, a cable range of 400 to 2100 nanometers, and a full width, half-maximum optical resolution of approximately 1.5 nanometers. Spectra were recorded using OceanView software, and data were interpreted and plotted using Microsoft Office Excel. Three to five readings were taken for each color analyzed.

##  X-ray Fluorescence Spectroscopy (XRF)

XRF readings were taken using a handheld Bruker-Tracer III-V+ instrument with a rhodium source, beryllium sample window roughly 3-by-4 millimeters, and a Si-Pin detector. Two readings were taken at each spot: one at 40 kiloelectron volts, 3 microamps, 60 seconds, and one at 15 kiloelectron volts, 32 microamps, 60 seconds under vacuum to improve sensitivity to lower mass elements. Spectral data were acquired and interpreted using S1pXRF and Artax software.

##  Paint-out Boards

A set of reference paint-out boards was made as a guide to better understand how indigo-containing paint films respond to MBR ([fig. 7.3](#fig_7_3)). The materials used to make the boards were selected based on a literature review of Romano-Egyptian painting practices, on material characterizations in the APPEAR database, and on FORS and XRF analyses of the BKM portraits. Five binding media and seven pigments in addition to indigo, all unaged, were chosen.[^13]

Linden (*Tilia americana*) panels were used as the support wood. In the APPEAR database, portraits described as having an aqueous binder usually have a white {{< q-def "ground" >}} layer, while those described as wax commonly have no ground, or sometimes a black ground. The white ground on many aqueous portraits, including [figure 7.5](#fig_7_5), is thickly applied with a visible brush texture.

One set of panels was sized with two layers of cow hide glue followed by a partial ground layer of {{< q-def "gypsum" >}} bound in cow hide glue, applied to mimic the brush texture observed on the portraits. The other set of panels was left unprepared as a comparative control.

On each board, gradients between indigo and one other pigment were established using three aqueous binders---one cow hide glue and two rabbit skin glues---and two {{< q-def "beeswax">}} binders---one yellow and one white. The pigments include Egyptian blue, {{< q-def "orpiment" >}}, {{< q-def "madder" >}}, {{< q-def "red ochre" >}}, gypsum, {{< q-def "lead white" >}}, and vine black. On the prepared boards, the aqueous paint-outs were applied over the gypsum ground and the wax paint-outs were applied directly on the sized wood. Each gradient step was divided into two halves. For the aqueous paint-outs, the halves comprise a single and a double layer of the same paint, while for the encaustic paint-outs, each half represents the same amount of wax combined with more or less pigment.

Indigo has a high tinting strength and was found on many of the BKM portraits in mixed pale purple hues that would have required only small amounts of colorant to create. To better represent the hues observed in the portraits, an additional pair of boards was made using minute quantities of indigo mixed with red ochre or madder.

##  Results

Indigo was identified on five of the six portraits in the BKM collection using FORS and Raman in combination with MBR images. On the three encaustic paintings in which it was identified, indigo was found exclusively in mixtures with a red lake pigment. On the two tempera portraits, indigo was detected more extensively throughout and in a broader range of color mixtures.

On the encaustic portraits of Demetrios and the Noblewoman ([fig. 7.1](#fig_7_1)), the {{< q-def "clavus" "*clavi*" >}} were rendered using indigo-containing paints applied to different effects. On Demetrios, a rich, dark purple layer was applied over a lighter pink layer. On the Noblewoman, overlapping brushstrokes of purple and pink paints with varying opacities were used. Indigo was identified in the purple paints on both portraits, but not in the pinks ([fig. 7.6](#fig_7_6)).[^14] A red lake pigment, most likely madder,[^15] comprises the dominant pigment in the pink paint and is mixed with indigo to make the purple.
{{< q-figure-group id="fig_7_6a, fig_7_6b, fig_7_6c" grid="3" caption="Details of the *clavus* on fig. 7.1. Normal light, UVF, MBR illustrating the red lake pigment’s characteristic pinkish-orange fluorescence, and MBR illustrating indigo’s bright response. The brightness of the MBR image has been enhanced for legibility." >}}


The Mummy Portrait of a Man ([fig. 7.7](#fig_7_7)) is an encaustic portrait that retains remnants of funerary wrappings, including resin, textile, and white cartonnage painted with tempera ([fig. 7.7](#fig_7_7)). This portrait has two *clavi*: one rendered in encaustic and painted at the same time as the sitter's face, and one in tempera that was added on top of the cartonnage when the panel was integrated into the mummy bundle. The encaustic *clavus* was ultimately covered by wrappings. Indigo was found only in the purple of the tempera *clavus* and was mixed with a red lake pigment ([fig. 7.8](#fig_7_8)). XRF, FORS, and Raman spectroscopy found no evidence of a blue pigment in the blue-gray encaustic *clavus*.
{{< q-figure id="fig_7_7" >}}
{{< q-figure-group id="fig_7_8a, fig_7_8b, fig_7_8c" grid="3" caption="Details of fig. 7.7. Normal light, UVF, MBR showing the bright responses of indigo on the painted purple cartonnage and of the resin associated with the mummy wrappings. The brightness of the MBR image has been enhanced for legibility." >}}

On the tempera portraits, indigo was identified in mixtures, creating both blue and purple colors. Indigo was used as the dominant pigment to paint bluish details including the rims of the cups and the bases of the {{< q-def "garland" "garlands" >}} held by both sitters. On the Portrait of a Young Person ([fig. 7.9](#fig_7_9)), indigo was also detected in the dark blue decorative bands on the neckline of the undertunic. On the Boy with a Floral Garland in His Hair ([fig. 7.5](#fig_7_5)), indigo was found in the leaves and flowers of the floral crown, as well as in the decorative bands and the *clavus*, where it was mixed with a red lake pigment to create a pale purple hue ([fig. 7.10](#fig_7_10)). These regions showed a very faint MBR response, appearing light pink in FCIR and light blue in FCUV. These false-color responses are similar to those observed on the paint-outs made as a reference for the pale purple hue using a small quantity of indigo mixed with madder.
{{< q-figure id="fig_7_9" >}}
{{< q-figure id="fig_7_10" >}}

##  Discussion

The use of multiple techniques clarified what data each method can yield individually and what information can be gleaned when the results are considered together. FORS analysis, which essentially exploits the same reflectance phenomena as MBR, provided localized spectral information that corroborated the material responses observed in the MBR images and elucidated the circumstances under which the subtraction technique can yield misleading results. Raman analysis was used as a complementary technique to substantiate or challenge material characterizations made using MBI and FORS. The full MBI suite and XRF data were considered in combination with results of these analyses to further characterize the pigments present on the portraits.

Materials that have reflectance behaviors similar to those of indigo in the 660 to 800 nanometers range can result in confounding MBR responses. In Romano-Egyptian mummy portraits, such materials include wood, resin, and red ochre ([fig. 7.11](#fig_7_11)). Wood yielded a consistent MBR response, both on unpainted areas of the reference boards and on the portraits where thin paint application or loss exposed the wood support ([fig. 7.10](#fig_7_10)). On the Mummy Portrait of a Man, translucent red-brown resin associated with the mummy wrappings appeared almost as bright as the indigo-containing paint ([fig. 7.8](#fig_7_8)). Red ochre was faintly visualized on the reference paint-outs ([fig. 7.12](#fig_7_12)) and on the two tempera portraits in the dark red outlines surrounding the flesh tones and in the dark reds of the garlands ([fig. 7.10](#fig_7_10)). Visual examination combined with MBR imaging could imply the dark purple-red color on the portraits was achieved through an admixture of indigo; however, XRF, Raman spectroscopy, and FORS indicated the color was achieved by red ochre alone.
{{< q-figure-group id="fig_7_11, fig_7_12" >}}

Using multiple images from the MBI suite in concert can elucidate the distribution of pigments across a painted surface. In the Boy with a Floral Garland in His Hair (fig. 7.5), the floral crown was painted using white, blue, pink, and red. The blue leaves and bands on the flowers contain indigo and appear bright in the MBR image. The dark red paint surrounding the center of each flower contains red ochre and appears is faintly visible ([fig. 7.10](#fig_7_10)). The pink centers of the flowers appear dark and were painted using a red lake pigment, likely madder. In the absence of other analytical techniques, UVF and FCUV images can help characterize madder and red ochre ([figs. 7.13](#fig_7_13) and [7.14](#fig_7_14)). On the crown, the red lake pigment fluoresces brightly under ultraviolet radiation and appears blue-violet in FCUV images, while the red ochre absorbs, appearing dark in UVF and dark purple in FCUV. These color responses and relationships proved consistent throughout this project, enabling comparisons across portraits, paint-out boards, and reference standards.
{{< q-figure-group grid="2" id="fig_7_13, fig_7_14" >}}

Synthesizing the results of multiple techniques provides a richer understanding of material usage and distribution. On the Noblewoman ([fig. 7.1](#fig_7_1)), the hair was rendered by applying an unmodulated layer of paint over the black ground; the hairstyle was then defined by adding a central part and tightly coiled curls at either ear in addition to short, directional highlights. FORS and handheld Raman identified indigo in the curls and highlights; however, MBR yielded no visible response. Images of the reference boards suggest that minute amounts of indigo are difficult to visualize via MBR. The painted details in the hair appear somewhat degraded under magnification; aging of the pigments and/or binding media may be affecting indigo's MBR response. The hairstyle details fluoresce strongly under UV, consistent with madder ([fig. 7.15](#fig_7_15)). Considering the FORS and Raman data together with the UVF image strongly suggests the brushstrokes comprise an indigo-madder mixture. Additionally, the blue-green color of these brushstrokes in FCUV ([fig. 7.16](#fig_7_16)) is similar to the FCUV color of the unbound indigo standard included in all images and of indigo mixed with madder on the paint-out boards. Although FCUV alone is not diagnostic for indigo, within this suite of images it is notably corroborative.
{{< q-figure-group id="fig_7_15, fig_7_16" >}}

##  Conclusion

The setup and capture protocols developed during this investigation generate consistent MBR images using accessible tools and software. MBR is a relatively straightforward and low-tech method for characterizing and mapping materials, such as indigo, across the surface of an object, which can inform further analysis or enable extrapolation from spot assays. MBI image suites can help clarify material responses by considering behaviors across different wavelengths and bands.

Further research could advance the noninvasive characterization and mapping of materials in cultural heritage objects.[^16] MBR performed with the filters discussed here could be used to investigate the effectiveness of imaging indigo-containing paint that has been covered as a result of conservation treatment. Additional imaging and analysis of Romano-Egyptian portraits and reference paint-outs could address questions about how aging impacts indigo's MBR response. Future MBR studies could investigate new combinations of filters to target other materials with pronounced changes in reflectance within the ultraviolet, visible, and infrared spectral regions.

##  Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank Anna Serotta for advising and helping to carry out the imaging; Sylvana Barrett and Marie Svoboda for sharing their expertise with historic painting practices; BKM curators Edward Bleiberg and Yekaterina Barbash and curatorial assistant Kathy Zurek Doule for enabling this research; BKM interns Colleen Watkins, Natasha Kung, Meredith Menache, Josephine Ren, Ariana Smith, Anneliese Holmes, and Heather Hodge for their assistance in making the paint out boards; Nathan Griffith for sharing his understanding of image processing softwares and functions; and the BKM conservation department along with Anne Pasternak, Shelby White and Leon Levy Director of the Brooklyn Museum, for supporting this project. Raman analysis was carried out at the Department of Scientific Research of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, as part of the Network Initiative for Conservation Science (NICS). Support for NICS was provided by a grant from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation.

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}
## Notes
{{< /q-class >}}

[^1]: {{< q-cite "Schweppe 1997" >}}.

[^2]: {{< q-cite "Peacock 2000" >}}.

[^3]: {{< q-cite "Hofenk de Graaff 2004b" >}}.

[^4]: {{< q-cite "Webb, Summerour, and Giaccai 2014" >}}.

[^5]: {{< q-cite "Kushel 2011" >}}, sections 6.4.7 and 6.5.8.

[^6]: This Spectralon exhibits 99 percent reflectance from 400 to 1600 nanometers, decreasing to a minimum of approximately 95 percent reflectance from 250 to 400 nanometers and from 1600 to 2500 nanometers. "Spectralon® Diffuse Reflectance Standards," Labsphere, accessed December 21, 2018, [https://www.labsphere.com/site/assets/files/2628/pb-13058rev00standards.pdf](https://www.labsphere.com/site/assets/files/2628/pb-13058rev00standards.pdf).

[^7]: Indigo, Indian, powder, *Indigofera tinctoria*, Kremer Pigments item 36000.

[^8]: Post-processing desaturation is not included in the MBR technique performed at MCI, which used a camera modified to capture monochrome images. The system used for this paper was based on modifications to BKM's existing MBI kit, which does not include a monochrome camera but is more accessible.

[^9]: MidOpt bandpass filter transmission curves. "BP600 Dark Red Bandpass Filter" and "BP735 Near-IR Bandpass Filter," MidOpt, accessed January 11, 2019, [http://midopt.com/filters/bp660/](http://midopt.com/filters/bp660/);cd do [http://midopt.com/filters/bp735/](http://midopt.com/filters/bp735/).

[^10]: Presentation delivered on May 16, 2019, American Institute for Conservation, 47th Annual Meeting, "Materials Characterization with Multiband Reflectance Image Subtraction at the Brooklyn Museum: A New Tool for the Multiband Imaging Kit."

[^11]: This may seem mathematically arbitrary, but it follows the optical behavior of indigo, as it absorbs at 660 nanometers and appears dark in the BP660 capture and reflects at 735 nanometers and appears light in the BP735 capture.

[^12]: {{< q-cite "Warda 2011" >}}.

[^13]: Materials list:

    Indigo (see [note 9](#fn:9)).

    Linden wood (*Tilia americana*), Woodworkers Source.

    Cow hide glue, cubes, Kremer Pigments item 63020.

    Rabbit skin glue, cubes, Kremer Pigments item 63025.

    Rabbit skin glue, undated historic BKM lab materials.

    Beeswax, natural, bright yellow beads, Kremer Pigments item 62200.

    White beeswax, white beads, Natural Pigments.

    Gypsum, food grade calcium sulfate, LD Carlson.

    Egyptian blue, Kremer Pigments item 10060.

    Red Moroccan ochre, Kremer Pigments item 116430.

    Orpiment, Kremer Pigments item 10700.

    Madder Lake, made from natural roots, Kremer Pigments item 37202.

    Lead white, undated historic BKM lab materials.

    Vine black, Kremer Pigments item 47000.

[^14]: All MBR images in this paper have been slightly enhanced for print.

[^15]: The red lake pigment is most likely madder, based on the characteristic pinkish-orange fluorescence observed in UVF and on the well-documented use of madder in this part of the classical world; see {{< q-cite "Daniels et al. 2014" >}}.

[^16]: {{< q-cite "Dyer et al. 2018" >}}.
